# Repetition: _Iterative_ python statements

The power of programming comes from _looping_ control statements that run a single block of code repeatedly instead of having sequences of almost identical blocks of code. Repetition is central to program execution; The computer is valuable because it can repeat simple tasks with slight variations very very fast. Repetition is called _iteration_.  Python comes with a two looping statements, notably, the `for` statement and the `while` statement. The `for` statement is used when the limit of the number of repetitions is known before entering the loop; the `while` statement is more general. 

Use `for` statement to repeat other statements for a fixed number of passes, such as a block of assignment and print statements. Such a control structure is called a _loop_, hence iteration is often referred to as "looping over" the block. As with other control statements
the `for` statement ends with a colon and comes before the block, which is indicated by a common indent. 
A for-loop also generates a _loop variable_ that changes with each pass. In the `for` statement the loop variable comes before the keyword `in`.  Between `in` and the colon is a sequence of values. The `for` statement does an assignment of the loop variable to each value in the sequence in order.

Here's an example that calculates a table of the `gamma` function for 1 to 10, using values of a loop variable, `n` that ranges from 0 to 9:

    for n in range(10):
        x = n+1
        print(f'Gamma of {x} is\n\t{math.gamma(x).'})

The sequence, in this case is `[0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]`, which is generated by the python function `range(10)`.

We didn't compute "gamma(0)" since its value doesn't exist. Instead we created `x` from the looping variable which ranges from 1 to 10. Hence the loop can be over derived ranges that are a function of the looping variable.

**Exercise** Finding the minimum of `gamma`

Examining the output in the above example, it looks like the function does something interesting between x=1 and x=2.  Run the loop with a derived value that ranges over 1 to 2, to localize the value of x where the gamma function is a minimum. 

## Using for-loops to simplify sequences of print statements.

Recall the "ascii art" assignment, where you needed multiple print statements to generate regular output patterns? For example, let's say you wrote a sequence of 5 print statements to generate this pattern:

    *****
    ****
    ***
    **
    *
    
Here's a way to do the same thing with just one (well, maybe two) print statements and two for-loops:

     n = 5
    for k in range(n):
        m = n - k 
        for j in range(m):
            print('*', end ='')
        print()

This example introduces new print function features. The optional argument `end=''` prevents adding a newline character after the print output so that the next print output begins on the same line. Alternately print with no arguments just prints a newline. 

The nested for-loops makes the inner loop (with loop variable `j`) run once for each time the outer loop runs.  In addition the number of repetitions in the inner loop depends on the outer loop variable, _decreasing_ the number of repetitions as the outer loop variable increases.

**Exercise** Efficient Ascii-art

By using for-loops and function definitions minimize the number of lines of code to print your ascii-art picture. At best there should be no two identical statements in your code. 

## Iteration with `while` loops. 

Because of it's importance, there are numerous ways to do iteration; the "for-loop" is concise, but the "while-loop" exposes the "innards" and is can re-compute the number of iterations performed within the loop block.  Here's the gamma function example re-written as a while-loop:

    n = 1
    while n < 10:
       print(f'Gamma of {x} is\n\t{math.gamma(x).'})
        n = n + 1

In a while-loop, it's up to you to change the looping variable and the stopping logical-expression. 

**Exercise**

(This is challenging)  Use a while-loop to search for a more accurate estimate of gamma function minimum.  Have the iteration terminate when the minimum is found. 



 (Good source of additional readings on Python:)[http://openbookproject.net/thinkcs/python/english3e/iteration.html]